---
permalink: /
title: "Stefan P Petkov"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

I am an immunologist turned data scientist with a PhD degree form Karolinska Institutet. My [dissertation](https://openarchive.ki.se/xmlui/handle/10616/46147) focused on real-time monitoring of DNA vaccine efficacy by in vivo imaging. Since the completion of my graduate studies I have developed expertise in working big data such as these generated by next-generation sequencing of human genomes. Below are some examples of my latest work. For a complete list, go to the [publications](https://stefanppetkov.github.io/publications) page or click on the PubMed link.


Selected Publications
---------------------

[High CD45 expression of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells correlates with the size of HIV-1 reservoir in blood](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-77433-z)

Using mass cytometry, we investigated the expression of 28 markers on CD8+ and CD4+ T cells from HIV-1 infected patients with a variable size of HIV-1 reservoir defined as high (HR) and low (LR) reservoir; we aimed at identifying phenotypic associations of T cells with size of HIV-1 reservoir. We showed that the frequency of CD45+ CD8+ and CD4+ T cells was directly proportional to the size of HIV-1 reservoir; HR patients had a significantly larger frequency of blood CD45high T cells and higher CD45 expression on both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. CD45 is a receptor-type protein tyrosine phosphatase essential in TCR signaling. Functional and phenotypical analysis of CD45high cells revealed that they express activation and proliferation markers (CD38 + HLA-DR + and Ki-67) and produce cytokines upon in vitro activation. CD45high T cells also expressed high levels of immune check-point PD-1. Our results link CD45 expression on T cells to HIV-1 reservoir; PD-1 expression on CD45high T cells may contribute to their exhaustion.


[Distinct transcriptomic profiles of naïve CD4+ T cells distinguish HIV-1 infected patients initiating antiretroviral therapy at acute or chronic phase of infection](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0888754321003219?via%3Dihub)

We analyzed the whole transcriptome characteristics of blood CD4+ T naïve (TN) cells isolated from HIV-1 infected patients starting ART at acute (early ART = EA; n = 13) or chronic (late ART = LA; n = 11) phase of infection and controls (C; n = 15). RNA sequencing revealed 389 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in EA and 810 in LA group in relation to controls. Comparison of the two groups of patients showed 183 DEGs. We focused on DEGs involved in apoptosis, inflammation and immune response. Clustering showed a poor separation of EA from C suggesting that these two groups present a similar transcriptomic profile of CD4+ TN cells. The comparison of EA and LA patients resulted in a high cluster purity revealing that different biological dysfunctions characterize EA and LA patients. The upregulated expression of several inflammatory chemokine genes distinguished the patient groups from C; CCL2 and CCL7, however, were downregulated in EA compared to LA patients. BCL2, an anti-apoptotic factor pivotal for naïve T cell homeostasis, distinguished both EA and LA from C. The expression of several DEGs involved in different inflammatory processes (TLR4, PTGS2, RAG1, IFNA16) was lower in EA compared LA. We conclude that although the transcriptome of CD4+ TN cells isolated from patients initiating ART at acute infection reveals a more quiescent phenotype, the survival profile of these cells still appears to be affected. Our results show that the detrimental process of inflammation is under more efficient control in EA patients.


[Short-term oral pre-exposure prophylaxis against HIV-1 modulates the transcriptome of foreskin tissue in young men in Africa](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2022.1009978/full)

Whilst short-term oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) with antiretroviral drugs in men who have sex with men has shown protection against HIV-1 infection, the impact of this regimen on the in vivo foreskin transcriptome is unknown. We collected foreskin tissue after voluntary medical male circumcision from 144 young men (72 from Uganda and 72 from South Africa) randomized to one to two doses of either oral tenofovir (TFV) disoproxil fumarate (FTC-TDF) or tenofovir alafenamide (FTC-TAF) or no drug (untreated controls). This novel approach allowed us to examine the impact of short-term oral PrEP on transcriptome of the male genital tract. A single dose of FTC-TDF did not affect the foreskin transcriptome in relation to control arm, however one dose of FTC-TAF induced upregulation of four genes AKAP8, KIAA0141, HSCB and METTL17. Following two doses of either FTC-TDF or FTC-TAF, there was an increase in 34 differentially expressed genes for FTC-TDF and 15 for FTC-TAF, with nine DEGs in common: KIAA0141, SAFB2, CACTIN, FXR2, AKAP8, HSCB, CLNS1A, DDX27 and DCAF15. Functional analysis of differentially expressed genes revealed modulation of biological processes related to mitochondrial stress (KIAA0141, HSCB and METTL17), anti-viral and anti-inflammatory pathways (CACTIN and AKAP8). Our results show that short-course on-demand oral PrEP in men modulates genes in foreskin tissue which are likely unfavorable to HIV acquisition and replication. We also describe an upregulated expression of genes involved in diverse mitochondria biology which may potentially result in worsened mitochondria-related. These results warrant further studies to assess the role of short-course and prolonged oral PrEP on biological processes of the foreskin mucosa.


[Impaired CD4+ T cell differentiation in HIV-1 infected patients receiving early anti-retroviral therapy](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0888754322001124?via%3Dihub)

Differentiation of CD4+ T naïve (TN) into central memory (TCM) cells involves extensive molecular processes. We compared the transcriptomes of CD4+ TN and TCM cells from HIV-1 infected patients receiving early anti-retroviral therapy (ART; EA; n = 13) and controls (n = 15). Comparison of protein coding genes between TCM and TN revealed 533 and 82 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in controls and EA, respectively. A high degree of transcriptional complexity was detected during transition of CD4+ TN to TCM cells in controls involving 70 TFs, 20 master regulators of T cell differentiation (TBX21, GATA3, RARA, FOXP3, RORC); in EA only 7 TFs were modulated with expression of several master regulators remaining unchanged during differentiation. Analysis of interactions between modulated TFs and target genes revealed important regulatory interactions missing in EA group. We conclude that T cell differentiation in EA patients is impaired due to reduced modulation of genes involved in transition from CD4+ TN to TCM cells.


[DNA immunization site determines the level of gene expression and the magnitude, but not the type of the induced immune response](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0197902)

Optimization of DNA vaccine delivery improves the potency of the immune response and is crucial to clinical success. Here, we inquired how such optimization impacts the magnitude of the response, its specificity and type. BALB/c mice were DNA-immunized with two model immunogens, HIV-1 protease and reverse transcriptase by intramuscular or intradermal injections with electroporation. DNA immunogens were co-delivered with DNA encoding luciferase. Delivery and expression were monitored by in vivo bioluminescence imaging (BLI). The endpoint immune responses were assessed by IFN-γ/IL-2 FluoroSpot, multiparametric flow cytometry and antibody ELISA. Expression and immunogenicity were compared in relation to the delivery route. Regardless of the route, protease generated mainly IFN-γ, and reverse transcriptase, IL-2 and antibody response. BLI of mice immunized with protease- or reverse transcriptase/reporter plasmid mixtures, demonstrated significant loss of luminescence over time. The rate of decline of luminescence strongly correlated with the magnitude of immunogen-specific response, and depended on the immunogenicity profile and the immunization route. In vitro and in vivo BLI-based assays demonstrated that intradermal delivery strongly improved the immunogenicity of protease, and to a lesser extent, of reverse transcriptase. Immune response polarization and epitope hierarchy were not affected. Thus, by changing delivery/immunogen expression sites, it is possible to modulate the magnitude, but not the type or fine specificity of the induced immune response.


[Mobilization of systemic CCL4 following HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis in young men in Africa](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2022.965214/full)

HIV-1 pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) relies on inhibition of HIV-1 replication steps. To understand how PrEP modulates the immunological environment, we derived the plasma proteomic profile of men receiving emtricitabine-tenofovir (FTC-TDF) or emtricitabine-tenofovir alafenamide (FTC-TAF) during the CHAPS trial in South Africa and Uganda (NCT03986970). The CHAPS trial randomized 144 participants to one control and 8 PrEP arms, differing by drug type, number of PrEP doses and timing from final PrEP dose to sampling. Blood was collected pre- and post-PrEP. The inflammatory profile of plasma samples was analyzed using Olink (N=92 proteins) and Luminex (N=33) and associated with plasma drug concentrations using mass spectrometry. The proteins whose levels changed most significantly from pre- to post-PrEP were CCL4, CCL3 and TNF-α; CCL4 was the key discriminator between pre- and post-PrEP samples. CCL4 and CCL3 levels were significantly increased in post-PrEP samples compared to control specimens. CCL4 was significantly correlated with FTC drug levels in plasma. Production of inflammatory chemokines CCL4 and CCL3 in response to short-term PrEP indicates the mobilization of ligands which potentially block virus attachment to CCR5 HIV-1 co-receptor. The significant correlation between CCL4 and FTC levels suggests that CCL4 increase is modulated as an inflammatory response to PrEP.